all right so we're now ready to start
writing the code to make our calculator
calculate now we should have the
calculator project open we're going to
be editing main activity to Katie so I'm
what I'm going to do is just to close
down the activity main because we don't
really need that open anymore
maybe here and close it down and they're
going to click on the project pane and
it will come down here and open the
package and the app Java then the
package name Academy don't learn
programming that calculator and
double-click main activity you want to
make sure also that you're also in the
Android view alright so there's our
class our main activity dot Katie now
all the activity does at the moment is
display the layout on the screen and
that's taken care of by Android when we
pass the layouts ID to set content view
here on line 10 the Android will then be
watching the buttons but as we haven't
attached any code to them
nothing will happen when we tap the
buttons now it's probably a good idea to
think about what we want it to do so
let's actually have a look at some flow
charts describing how the app will work
now this is the main part of the program
you can see on-screen and we've already
got the code to display the layout on
the screen so it's that call to set
content view that will display our
activity and it's called main layout so
next we need to perform some
initialization and this will find all
the buttons that we're interested in and
then set their own click listener
so that they actually do something when
they're tapped the program will then
wait waking up each time the android
framework calls one of the listeners
that we've set that's the button click
process after the initialization you
know once the button is clicked we need
to decide if it was one of the digit
keys or the decimal point in which case
we'll just append it to the number on
the screen or if it represents an
operation to perform on the numbers plus
miners multiply divide or equals now the
flow chart shows a decision being made
there but that's a representation of how
the logic works and doesn't directly
correspond to how we're going to code it
in place of a test to see what kind of
button was clicked we're going to assign
one or all
to different listeners to the different
types of button so the digits and
decimal point buttons will have one
onclicklistener
and the operations button will have
another now the flow chart is accurate
but when you see one of those decision
diamonds in a flow chart you generally
expect the seen if statement in the code
but to will be implementing the decision
by attaching different listeners to the
buttons instead now the digit a decimal
point listener is going to be very
simple it just reads the caption on the
button and appends it to the number
that's being built up in the Edit text
on the screen when one of the operation
buttons is tapped
it'll just read the number from the edit
text then check to make sure there
actually was a number there if there
isn't and the yellow box is empty the
operation is stored as a pending
operation and the program goes back to
wait for another button to be clicked
and it'll also update the little
textview on the left with the symbol for
the operation that was tapped just to
remind the user what arithmetic
operation will be performed when they
press the equals button and if there was
a number the program will perform
whatever operation was pending and then
display the result so as you can see on
this slide the program will allow you to
do things like 3 plus 50 minus 2 times 8
and update the result after each stage
so when you type the 3 it will appear on
the display when you press + there's
nothing to add to 3 so the pending
operation becomes plus once you've
entered 50 the minus button will cause
the plus operation to be performed and
the result 30 3 in this case will appear
in the result now the pending operation
will then be minors after 2 is entered
the multiply button will cause the
subtraction to be performed the result
of 42 will be displayed and the pending
operation will then be multiplied and
once 8 is entered nothing will happen
until another operation key including
equals is tapped then the new result
will be displayed alright so that looks
fairly straightforward so let's go and
add the code alright so we're going to
start off with fields 2
the references to the three widgets that
will be updated or read and also some
variables to store the operands and the
pending operation so let's go ahead and
do that now so we've got our various
code in I'm just going to expand the
import so we can see what we're doing
here and just below the class activity
line on line six I'll go to add a line
here it's going to be private space VAR
result space : and edit text equals null
now Android studio is showing an error
on line ages you can see there if I
hover over it no cannot be a value of a
non null type edit text now : does as
much as possible to protect us from null
pointer exceptions and des by default
properties and variables in Kotlin can't
be null now that's really great for
preventing null pointer exceptions but
it means that we have to change the way
we think slightly if you used to Java so
we can't just not initialize result on
because Kotlin won't allow that so just
to show that if I remove the equals null
on the end there we also get another
error property must be initialized or be
abstract now with a Java mindset we
could just declare result to be a
nullable type which we do by adding a
question mark after the name so I could
come back here under the inner text and
put a question mark and set that equal
to null and that indeed does get rid of
the error but now we lose all the
protection from null pointer exceptions
that Kotlin provides now marking
variables is nullable is sometimes valid
and we're going to be doing that shortly
but unless you've got a good reason for
doing this then it should be avoided
so the problem with God is that we have
to initialize result to something but we
can't get the reference to our edit text
widget until the oncreate method
executes now the Java solution of
initializing it to null is an actually
good practice in Kotlin now fortunately
the designers of the cotton language
have thought of this and they provide
the late init keyword as
way to handle this situation so what we
can do is come back up here and for our
definition we can put private and before
the VAR or put late you need their
result in edit X and I'll get rid of the
question mark equals null on the end
there you can see the errors disappeared
there and what that does it tells Kotlin
that we're using a non nullable variable
but that we're going to defer giving it
a value until later so late into this
you probably have figured out is short
for late initialization now if we
attempt to use result before giving it a
value the app will actually crash now
we've currently you'll get a Kotlin
don't uninitialized property access
exception although the documentation is
a bit vague about the exact exception so
we probably should rely on that exact
exception in our code but that's not a
problem because you wouldn't want to
catch that exception it fixed the
problem after finding it during testing
ok so that's one way to solve the
problem and I'm going to use this same
later net approach for the next widget
the other edittext which I'm going to
call a new number let's go on and create
that so private late in it their new
number colon and inner text again so
Laden it's very useful in cases like
this the keep in mind can only be used
with var properties in other words
that's properties that are read and
write now sometimes that's fine we may
want to make result refer to different
edit text widgets while the code runs in
that case late in it is probably the
best way to define it but in this app
the references to our widgets won't
change and that means that in colon we
should consider declaring them as Val
rather than var if that doesn't mean
much to you then review the Kotlin
tutorials earlier in this course alright
so another way to declare our widget
references is to use the lazy delegate
so I'm going to show you how to do that
so we're going to write some code now
we're gonna top on the next line private
vowel display operation by lazy then we
need left-to-right curly braces and
within then we're going to put fine V by
ID and have the parentheses but before
the parentheses we want to have two
or a diamond as you can see there left
and right sour signs and then we're
going to type text view then in
parentheses we're going to put our dot
ID dot operation that's what a space
says has a bit more readable now when
when using this by lazy you're defining
a function that will be called to assign
the value to the property now the
function will be called the first time
that the property is accessed then the
value is cached so that the function
isn't called again that's pretty cool so
as long as we don't access display
operation until uncreate has been called
this will work fine and it has the
advantage that display operation can be
declared as bell which can make code
more robust for properties that won't
change now there's no reason why I
couldn't have used the same approach for
all three variables in fact we probably
should because there's no reason and
result and new number can't be declared
as Val but I've done it this way to show
you the options and why you may have to
use late in it rather than the lazy
delegation now there are other ways of
handling this and we'll see another
alternative shortly Kotlin development
for Android is still fairly new and
developers uh still working out which
approaches to settle on Google for
instance don't yet have a style guide
for Kotlin at least not at the time of
recording this video when they do you'll
probably have to find it at this address
and I'm just going to put that on the
screen there forever or I'll actually
just open a browser so when they do
release one which I'm sure they will in
time it'll probably be at this address
github.com forward slash google forward
slash style guide or one word and you
can see there if we actually scroll down
there's various languages that they
actually talk about in their job are C++
Python and so forth but at the time I'm
recording this there isn't a guide for
Kotlin
you can see there's nothing that seems
to be starting with : I'm gonna do a
quick search nothing there but I would
say in time almost certainly they will
release a style guide for Kotlin and
once we've finished is that what I'm
going to do is change it to use another
way then you've seen three different
ways of dealing with this situation
and you can understand code regardless
of the approach used but I'm just gonna
go back to Android studio now one thing
to know is that the Lazy function is
thread safe and that means that if the
display operation property is accessed
by code in two or more threads
simultaneously the function will still
only be called once now don't worry if
that doesn't make sense we will be
talking about background threads later
in the course for now though it's enough
to use the modified version that I'm
just about to enter now our activity
class can't be accessed by more than one
thread so there's actually no need for
the extra overhead that lazy includes by
default so when you're just using it in
an activity as we are here then you can
add an extra parameter to disable the
thread safe code I'm going to do that
now so after this by lazy we put in
parenthesis then we type in lazy thread
safety mode none I'm choosing that from
the drop-down and everything else will
be as it was before yes I said don't
worry too much about that at this stage
you probably do want to add that lazy
thread safety mode none argument too
lazy whenever you're using it in an
activity like we are here and if you
need thread safety in your properties
you'll know and all of this will make a
lot more sense later alright so moving
on now we also need to make some
variables to store the numbers that are
we're going to be using in our
calculations let's go ahead and do that
and I'll just make a note here of what
these are so variable variables to hold
the operands and type of calculations
rounds in type of calculation and the
ones that we want here private bar
around one
: we want double capital D question mark
equals null and I'll just top the other
two then we'll talk about these private
the bar again operand 2 : it can also be
a double no question mark this time
equals zero point zero is 0.04 a period
whatever you used to calling it private
bar pending operation equals and in
double quote quotes an equal sign now I
mentioned earlier that we'll be looking
at a nullable variable and the
Declaration of operand one shows how to
specify that it can be null to do that
you just put a question mark after its
type as you can see I've done there on
line 14 now the reason we're allowing up
around want to be know is that we need
to record whether it's been given a
value or not now when the apps first
started there won't be a number to
perform calculations on in our app needs
to allow for this so that it knows when
the number that the user enters is
operand 1 or operand 2 now a null value
for operand 1 signifies that the user
hasn't yet given it a value and you'll
see how to make use of this in a moment
you know the important thing is that
null is a valid type for operand 1 so
we're deliberately declaring it as a
variable that can be null okay so moving
on now into the oncreate function we
need to find our widgets and store the
references to them in those 3 variables
and we also need to do that for the 16
buttons so let's go ahead and do that
now so I'm going to add this code after
the super don't create in after the
setcontentview calls so the first one is
going to be result is equal to its final
view by ID then it's going to be r dot
ID dot result you can see i'm selecting
from the drop downs then new number
that's equal to find view by ID and
that's going to be our dot ID dot new
number and again we're using the IDs
that we defined when we were creating a
layout so next we need to add
definitions for our data input buttons
so instead of coming to that effect I'm
gonna start with bowel butter the 0
colon button with a capital B equals
it's fine view by ID ID and it should be
button 0 then what I'm going to do is
just copy one for the rest so button 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and we'll also do the dot
so let's go ahead and change those and
the last one we'll call button dot and
button dot and this is going to be then
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 and 1
now you know if you made a mistake there
because we type something that doesn't
exist you'll get this red flag so these
again these IDs and the IDs we defined
when we were creating the layout earlier
in this section of the course all right
so that's our data input buttons there
now yeah we also need to store
references to our operations buttons as
well so let's make a comment about that
so operation buttons like a more space
here so we've got button equals so
button equals equals it's gonna be find
P by ID in in the diamond and put button
some type button this may be our dot ID
dot there's a button equals and let's do
the same for the divide button multiply
minus and plus so first one is going to
be divided
divide next one will do multiply let's
just eat his last two as well we also
want the miners and then finish up with
the plus and on the left-hand side let's
fix them as well so plus will be the
first one miners for the next one
didn't multiply and that should be it so
equals divide multiply minus and plus
and it was divided multiply minus and
plus on the right hand side and by the
way only referring to the button widgets
inside this uncreate method and so
there's no need to create properties for
them and that's why we've done that as
opposed to the other ones that where
we've created our properties outside
that topic outside the method now we're
using the Android find view by ID
function to get references to the
widgets in the layout but note that we
don't need to do that for the operation
widget the find V by ID function will be
called the first time we access display
operation so we don't need to find it in
our on create function and that's this
lazy delegate function that we defined
here on line 12 basically that's the
lazy delegate to at work now blink lines
in the code also help to separate the
two distinct groups of buttons and to
make our code more readable and they've
also included a comic to show the
differences between the two sets
now the first group of buttons are used
to enter the numerical values that will
be performing our calculations with the
second group of operations that we can
perform on those values here the add
subtraction multiplication and so forth
now
Copland can't work out the widgets typed
from the quarter point of view by ID
that just returns a view object which
could represent any type of object so we
need to provide provide Kotlin with a
clue to the type of widget we're
expecting now I've done this in two ways
in the first group of buttons I've done
that by specifying the top of each
widget that's the colon button as part
of the declaration but another way to
achieve the same thing is to specify the
generic type that find by finally by ID
will left
returned and to do that we specify on
the type parameter in angle brackets as
you can see here on line 40 now you
wouldn't normally mix the two ways of
doing this and he certainly what
shouldn't mix them in the same function
but I've done it here to show both ways
there's no advantage to either so pick
one you like and stick with it and be
consistent now obviously if you work for
a company that has a style guide and
they specify one method or the other
then you'd use the approach that they
are suggesting in their style guide I
would normally suggest using Google's
style guide as the pointer but as I
pointed out they haven't produced one
yet all right so at this point we now
need to set a listener on the buttons so
that they'll do something when they're
tapped now in the button click counter
app there was only one button so we used
an anonymous inner class to set its
listener but here we going to assign the
same listener to multiple buttons so
we're going to give the listener a name
for that reason I'm going to come down
here and code that still in the on
create a function and I'm gonna type Val
space listener is equal to this view
with a capital v dot on click listener
then in the left-to-right curly braces
we're gonna need to type V then dash and
a greater than sign press ENTER and type
Val B equals V s button the capital B
then it's going to be a new number
the next line new number dot append B
dot text okay so what have I done there
well the variable listener holds a
reference to a new onclicklistener
instance and it's on click method just
reads the caption of the button using
the text property that appends it to any
text already in the new number in a text
widget now when a button is tapped and
the android framework causes the on
click method it passes in a reference to
the button that was tapped now remember
that all widgets of views so any widget
that's tapped can be passed as a
parameter to unclick as an instance of
its base class view
now not all views can have text so
before we refer to the text property
we have to actually cast B as a widget
that does have a text property in this
case that's a button because we know
we're attaching this listener to buttons
now B isn't a very good name for a
variable but in a short function like
this two lines is not worth spending any
time to come up with anything more
meaningful definitely don't use names
like that for variables that have a
wider scope or that exists in more
complex functions with many lines of
code all right so the next step is to
assign this listener to each of the
eleven buttons at zero to nine and the
decimal point so that it's called
when one of them is clicked so to do
that we need to on the line below for
each one button whatever the button is
button 0 dot sit on click listener and
we're going to type in listener as the
argument we do the same for the other
button so we've got buttons 1 through 9
and then also we've got dot then we've
got 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 and obviously
button 0 was the first one that was set
now I guess I said we wanted to be
clever we could have stored all the
button variables in an array and loop
through to set the listener instead of
copying each line like I've done but
with only 11 buttons it probably
wouldn't save any lines of code but if I
was implementing a full keyboard and I'd
certainly look at doing something like
that now we should now be able to run
the program on an emulator and make sure
the buttons work as I should but this
video is getting a bit long so let's
actually look at doing that in the next
video